"free" to make change

it seems like people feel disenfrachised by the complexity of their software.

the gnu folks know it well: it feels like we should have the right to observe,
understand, modify, repair our software.

the worst feeling as a user of a general purpose computer is the sense that
the computer is getting away from you; the sense that you're no longer in
control of what's going on; you can't fathom why and don't even understand
where you would start to try to.

I want to be less susceptible to this feeling; I want to be empowered by
the technology I use and never get bogged down by breakage in something I can't
fix. I want to have a sense of mastery over and comfort in the tools that I
have to use to get my job done.

One of the tools I use frequently is Vim (a tremendously complex program, but
we'll get to that later). I find the relative simplicity of my Vim setup
comforting compared to that of an IDE or more complex editor. In it, the
simplest and most general way to navigate the filesystem is by
"fuzzy-searching" files, often scoped to the directory that Vim was launched
in. This functionality isn't built in to Vim, but it's popular enough that
there are many plugins that purport to provide it. 

The other day, I launched Vim in one of my project directories and typed in
"layout.css" to open the eponymously named file in the root of the project.
Bafflingly, my fuzzy search plugin reported "no results." This wasn't
complicated substring matching spread across word and path boundaries; this
was a failed match of a literal text string. Okay, I'm a programmer, and this
program is misbehaving... let's fix it. I jumped to the source of the plugin,
opened it up to begin debugging, and... wow. I just remembered that a) I don't
know vimscript and b) vimscript is an ancient, often inscrutable language,
full of questionable abbreviations and syntax that seemingly grew by
accretion. To add insult to injury, the plugin is **three thousand lines** of
the stuff... even if I knew the language, could I track down the bug in a
reasonable amount of time?

Thoroughly daunted, I gave up, but this episode stuck with me.
